##Testing String Equality
####Problem
You want to compare two strings to see if they’re equal, i.e., whether they contain the same sequence of characters.

#### Solution
In Scala, you compare two String instances with the == operator. Given these strings:
```scala
val s1 = "Hello"
val s2 = "Hello"
val s3 = "H" + "ello"

```
You can test their equality like this:

s1 == s2   // true
s1 == s3   // true

A nice benefit of the == method is that it doesn’t throw a NullPointerException on a basic test if a string is null:

```scala
val s4: String = null   // String = null
s3 == s4                // false
s4 == s3                // false

```
If you want to compare two strings in a case-insensitive manner, one approach is to convert both strings to uppercase or lowercase and compare them with the == method:
```scala
val s1 = "Hello"                   // Hello
val s2 = "hello"                   // hello
s1.toUpperCase == s2.toUpperCase   // true

```
You can also use the equalsIgnoreCase method that comes along with the Java String class:
```scala
val a = "Kimberly"
val b = "kimberly"
a.equalsIgnoreCase(b)   // true
```


Note that while an equality test on a null string doesn’t throw an exception, calling a method on a null string will throw a NullPointerException:
```scala
val s1: String = null
val s2: String = null

scala> s1.toUpperCase == s2.toUpperCase
java.lang.NullPointerException  // more output here ...
```

## Creating Multiline Strings
#### Problem
You want to create multiline strings within your Scala source code, like you can with the “heredoc” syntax of other languages.

#### Solution
In Scala, you create multiline strings by surrounding your text with three double quotes:
```scala

val foo = """This is
    a multiline
    String"""
```
Although this works, the second and third lines in this example will end up with whitespace at the beginning of their lines. When you print the string, it looks like this:
```text
This is
    a multiline
    String
```
You can solve this problem in several different ways. The best solution is to add the stripMargin method to the end of your multiline string and begin all lines after the first line with the pipe symbol (|):
```scala

val speech = """Four score and
               |seven years ago""".stripMargin
```
If you don’t like using the | symbol, just specify the character you want to use when calling stripMargin:
```scala

val speech = """Four score and
               #seven years ago""".stripMargin('#')
```
You can also left-justify every line after the first line of your string:
```scala

val foo = """Four score and
seven years ago"""
```
All of these approaches yield the same result, a multiline string with each line of the string left-justified:
```text
Four score and
seven years ago
```
Those approaches result in a true multiline string, with a hidden \n character after the the end of each line. If you want to convert this multiline string into one continuous line you can add a replaceAll method after the stripMargin call, replacing all newline characters with blank spaces:
```scala

val speech = """Four score and
               |seven years ago
               |our fathers ...""".stripMargin.replaceAll("\n", " ")
```
This yields:

```text
Four score and seven years ago our fathers ...
```

## Splitting Strings
#### Problem
You want to split a string into parts based on a field separator, such as a string you get from a comma-separated value (CSV) or pipe-delimited file.

#### Solution
Use one of the split methods that are available on String objects:
```text
scala> "hello world".split(" ")
res0: Array[String] = Array(hello, world)

```
The split method returns an array of strings, which you can work with as usual:
```text
scala> "hello world".split(" ").foreach(println)
hello
world
```

## Substituting Variables into Strings
#### Problem
You want to perform variable substitution into a string, like you can do with other languages, such as Perl, PHP, and Ruby.

#### Solution
To use basic string interpolation in Scala, precede your string with the letter s and include your variables inside the string, with each variable name preceded by a $ character. This is shown in the println statement in the following example:

```scala
val name = "Fred"
val age = 33
val weight = 200.00
scala> println(s"$name is $age years old, and weighs $weight pounds.")
```

Fred is 33 years old, and weighs 200.0 pounds.
According to the official Scala string interpolation documentation, when you precede your string with the letter s, you’re creating a processed string literal. This example uses the “s string interpolator,” which lets you embed variables inside a string, where the variables are replaced by their values.

__USING EXPRESSIONS IN STRING LITERALS__
In addition to putting simple variables inside strings, you can include expressions inside a string by placing the expression inside curly braces. In the following example, the value 1 is added to the variable age inside the processed string:
```text
scala> println(s"Age next year: ${age + 1}")
Age next year: 34

```

This example shows that you can use an equality expression inside the curly braces:
```scala
scala> println(s"You are 33 years old: ${age == 33}")
You are 33 years old: true

```

You also need to use curly braces when printing object fields:

```text
case class Student(name: String, score: Int)
val hannah = Student("Hannah", 95)

scala> println(s"${hannah.name} has a score of ${hannah.score}")
Hannah has a score of 95

```

Notice that attempting to print the values of object fields without wrapping them in curly braces results in the wrong information being printed:


```scala
// error: this is intentionally wrong
scala> println(s"$hannah.name has a score of $hannah.score")
Student(Hannah,95).name has a score of Student(Hannah,95).score

```

## Formatting String Output
#### Problem
You want to format string output, including strings that contain integers, floats, doubles, and characters.

#### Solution
Use printf-style formatting strings with the f interpolator. Many configuration options are shown in the following examples.

__Date/time formatting__
If you’re interested in date and time formatting, those topics are covered in Recipe 3.11.

FORMATTING STRINGS
Strings can be formatted with the %s format specifier. These examples show how to format strings, including how to left- and right-justify them within a certain space:
```scala
val h = "Hello"

f"'$h%s'"       // 'Hello'
f"'$h%10s'"     // '     Hello'
f"'$h%-10s'"    // 'Hello     '

```

I find it easier to read formatted strings when the variable name is enclosed in curly braces, so I’ll use this style for the rest of this recipe:
```scala

f"'${h}%s'"       // 'Hello'
f"'${h}%10s'"     // '     Hello'
f"'${h}%-10s'"    // 'Hello     '

```

FORMATTING FLOATING-POINT NUMBERS
Floating-point numbers are printed with the %f format specifier. Here are several examples that show the effects of formatting floating-point numbers, including Double and Float values:

```scala
val a = 10.3456         // a: Double = 10.3456
val b = 101234567.3456  // b: Double = 1.012345673456E8

f"'${a}%.1f'"     // '10.3'
f"'${a}%.2f'"     // '10.35'
f"'${a}%8.2f'"    // '   10.35'
f"'${a}%8.4f'"    // ' 10.3456'
f"'${a}%08.2f'"   // '00010.35'
f"'${a}%-8.2f'"   // '10.35   '

f"'${b}%-2.2f'"   // '101234567.35'
f"'${b}%-8.2f'"   // '101234567.35'
f"'${b}%-14.2f'"  // '101234567.35  '

```

Those examples demonstrate Double values, and the same syntax works with Float values:
```scala
val c = 10.5f     // c: Float = 10.5
f"'${c}%.1f'"     // '10.5'
f"'${c}%.2f'"     // '10.50'

```


INTEGER FORMATTING
Integers are printed with the %d format specifier. These examples show the effects of padding and justification:

```scala
val ten = 10
f"'${ten}%d'"         // '10'
f"'${ten}%5d'"        // '   10'
f"'${ten}%-5d'"       // '10   '

val maxInt = Int.MaxValue
f"'${maxInt}%5d'"     // '2147483647'

val maxLong = Long.MaxValue
f"'${maxLong}%5d'"    // '9223372036854775807'
f"'${maxLong}%22d'"   // '   9223372036854775807'

```
ZERO-FILL INTEGER OPTIONS
These examples show the effects of zero-filling integer values:

```scala
val zero = 0
val one = 1
val negTen = -10
val bigPos = 12345
val bigNeg = -12345
val maxInt = Int.MaxValue

// non-negative integers
f"${zero}%03d"      // 000
f"${one}%03d"       // 001
f"${bigPos}%03d"    // 12345
f"${bigPos}%08d"    // 00012345
f"${maxInt}%08d"    // 2147483647
f"${maxInt}%012d"   // 002147483647

// negative integers
f"${negTen}%03d"    // -10
f"${negTen}%05d"    // -0010
f"${bigNeg}%03d"    // -12345
f"${bigNeg}%08d"    // -0012345

```

CHARACTER FORMATTING
Characters are printed with the %c format specifier. These examples show the effects of padding and justification when formatting character output:

```scala
val s = 's'
f"|${s}%c|"     // |s|
f"|${s}%5c|"    // |    s|
f"|${s}%-5c|"   // |s    |

```

F WORKS WITH MULTILINE STRINGS
It’s important to note that the f interpolator works with multiline strings, as shown in this example:

```scala

val n = "Al"
val w = 200.0
val s = f"""Hi, my name is ${n}
  |and I weigh ${w}%.1f pounds.
  |""".stripMargin.replaceAll("\n", " ")
println(s)

```

That code results in the following output:

```text
Hi, my name is Al and I weigh 200.0 pounds.
```
