## Creating a Primary Constructor
#### Problem
You want to create a primary constructor for a Scala class, and you quickly find that the approach is different than Java (and other languages).

#### Solution
The primary constructor of a Scala class is a combination of:

The constructor parameters

Fields (variable assignments) in the body of the class

Statements and expressions that are executed in the body of the class

The following class demonstrates constructor parameters, class fields, and statements in the body of a class:
```scala

class Employee(var firstName: String, var lastName: String):
    // a statement
    println("the constructor begins ...")

    // some class fields (variable assignments)
    var age = 0
    private var salary = 0d

    // a method call
    printEmployeeInfo()

    // methods defined in the class
    override def toString = s"$firstName $lastName is $age years old"
    def printEmployeeInfo() = println(this)  //uses toString

    // any statement or field prior to the end of the class
    // definition is part of the class constructor
    println("the constructor ends")

// optional 'end' statement
end Employee
```
The constructor parameters, statements, and fields are all part of the class constructor. Notice that the methods are also in the body of the class, but they’re not part of the constructor.

Because the method calls in the body of the class are part of the constructor, when an instance of an Employee class is created, you’ll see the output from the println statements at the beginning and end of the class declaration, along with the call to the printEmployeeInfo method:
```scala

scala> val e = Employee("Kim", "Carnes")
the constructor begins ...
Kim Carnes is 0 years old
the constructor ends
val e: Employee = Kim Carnes is 0 years old
```

## Controlling the Visibility of Constructor Fields
#### Problem
You want to control the visibility of fields that are used as constructor parameters in a Scala class.

#### Solution
As shown in the following examples, the “visibility” of a constructor field in a Scala class is controlled by whether the field is declared as val, var, without either val or var, and whether private is added to the fields.

Here’s the short version of the solution:

If a field is declared as a var, Scala generates both getter and setter methods for that field

If the field is a val, Scala generates only a getter method for it

If a field doesn’t have a var or val modifier, Scala doesn’t generate a getter or a setter method for the field; it becomes private to the class

Additionally, var and val fields can be modified with the private keyword, which prevents public getters and setters from being generated

See the examples that follow for more details.

VAR FIELDS
If a constructor parameter is declared as a var, the value of the field can be changed, so Scala generates both getter and setter methods for that field. In this example, the constructor parameter name is declared as a var, so the field can be accessed and mutated:
```shell script

scala> class Person(var name: String)
scala> val p = Person("Mark Sinclair Vincent")

// getter
scala> p.name
val res0: String = Mark Sinclair Vincent

// setter
scala> p.name = "Vin Diesel"

scala> p.name
val res1: String = Vin Diesel
```
If you’re familiar with Java, you can also see that Scala does not follow the JavaBean “getName/setName” naming convention when generating accessor and mutator methods. Instead, you simply access a field by its name.

VAL FIELDS
If a constructor field is defined as a val, the value of the field can’t be changed once it’s been set — it’s immutable, like final in Java. Therefore it makes sense that it should have an accessor method, and should not have a mutator method:

```shell script
scala> class Person(val name: String)
defined class Person

scala> val p = Person("Jane Doe")
p: Person = Person@3f9f332b

// getter
scala> p.name
res0: String = Jane Doe

// attempt to use a setter
scala> p.name = "Wilma Flintstone"
1 |p.name = "Wilma Flintstone"
  |^^^^^^^^^
  |Reassignment to val name
```
The last example fails because a mutator method is not generated for a val field.

FIELDS WITHOUT VAL OR VAR
When neither val nor var are specified on constructor parameters, the field becomes private to the class, and Scala doesn’t generate accessor or mutator methods. You can see that when you create a class like this:
```scala
class SuperEncryptor(password: String):
    // encrypt increments each Char in a String by 1
    private def encrypt(s: String) = s.map(c => (c + 1).toChar)
    def getEncryptedPassword = encrypt(password)
```
and then attempt to access the password field, which was declared without val or var:


```shell script
val e = SuperEncryptor("1234")
e.password               // error: value password cannot be accessed
e.getEncryptedPassword   // 2345
```
As shown, you can’t directly access the password field, but because the getEncryptedPassword method is a class member, it can access password. If you continue to experiment with this code, you’ll see that declaring password without val or var is equivalent to making it a private val.

In most cases I only use this syntax by accident — I forget to specify val or var for the field — but it can make sense if you want to accept a constructor parameter and then use that parameter within the class, but don’t want to make it directly available outside the class.

ADDING PRIVATE TO VAL OR VAR
In addition to these three basic configurations, you can add the private keyword to a val or var field. This prevents getter and setter methods from being generated, so the field can only be accessed from within members of the class, as shown with the salary field in this example:

```scala
enum Role:
    case HumanResources, WorkerBee

import Role._

class Employee(var name: String, private var salary: Double):
    def getSalary(r: Role): Option[Double] = r match
        case HumanResources => Some(salary)
        case _ => None
```
In this code, getSalary can access the salary field because it’s defined inside the class, but the salary field can’t be directly accessed from outside the class, as demonstrated in this example:
```scala

val e = Employee("Steve Jobs", 1)

// to access the salary field you have to use getSalary
e.name                        // Steve Jobs
e.getSalary(WorkerBee)        // None
e.getSalary(HumanResources)   // Some(1.0)

e.salary   // error: variable salary in class Employee cannot be accessed

```

## Defining Auxiliary Constructors for Classes
#### Problem
You want to define one or more auxiliary constructors for a class so that consumers of the class can have multiple ways to create object instances.

#### Solution
Define the auxiliary constructors as methods in the class with the name this and the proper signature. You can define multiple auxiliary constructors, but they must have different signatures (parameter lists). Also, each constructor must call one of the previously defined constructors.

To set up an example, here are two enum definitions that will be used in a Pizza class that follows:

    enum CrustSize:
        case Small, Medium, Large

    enum CrustType:
        case Thin, Regular, Thick
Given those definitions, here’s a Pizza class with a primary constructor and three auxiliary constructors:

    import CrustSize._, CrustType._

    // primary constructor
    class Pizza (var crustSize: CrustSize, var crustType: CrustType):

        // one-arg auxiliary constructor
        def this(crustSize: CrustSize) =
            this(crustSize, Pizza.DefaultCrustType)

        // one-arg auxiliary constructor
        def this(crustType: CrustType) =
            this(Pizza.DefaultCrustSize, crustType)

        // zero-arg auxiliary constructor
        def this() =
            this(Pizza.DefaultCrustSize, Pizza.DefaultCrustType)

        override def toString = s"A $crustSize pizza with a $crustType crust"

    object Pizza:
        val DefaultCrustSize = Medium
        val DefaultCrustType = Regular
Given those constructors, the same pizza can now be created in the following ways:

    import Pizza.{DefaultCrustSize, DefaultCrustType}

    // use the different constructors
    val p1 = Pizza(DefaultCrustSize, DefaultCrustType)
    val p2 = Pizza(DefaultCrustSize)
    val p3 = Pizza(DefaultCrustType)
    val p4 = Pizza
All of those definitions result in the same output:

A Medium pizza with a Regular crust

## Defining a Private Primary Constructor
#### Problem
You want to make the primary constructor of a class private, such as to enforce the Singleton pattern.

#### Solution
To make the primary constructor private, insert the private keyword in between the class name and any parameters the constructor accepts:

// a private one-arg primary constructor
class Person private (var name: String)
As shown in the REPL, this keeps you from being able to create an instance of the class:

    scala> class Person private(name: String)
    defined class Person

    scala> val p = Person("Mercedes")
    1 |val p = Person("Mercedes")
      |        ^^
      |method apply cannot be accessed as a member of Person.type
When I first saw this syntax I thought it was a little unusual, but if you read the code out loud as you scan it, you’ll read it as, “This is a Person class with a private constructor …” I find that the words “private constructor” in that sentence help me remember to put the private keyword immediately before the constructor parameters.

## Providing Default Values for Constructor Parameters
#### Problem
You want to provide a default value for a constructor parameter, which gives consumers of your class the option of specifying that parameter when calling the constructor, or not.

#### Solution
Give the parameter a default value in the constructor declaration. Here’s a declaration of a Socket class with one constructor parameter named timeout that has a default value of 10_000:

    class Socket(val timeout: Int = 10_000)
Because the parameter is defined with a default value, you can call the constructor without specifying a timeout value, in which case you get the default value:

    val s = Socket()
    s.timeout   // Int = 10000
You can also specify a desired timeout value when creating a new Socket:

    val s = Socket(5_000)
    s.timeout   // Int = 5000

## Handling Constructor Parameters When Extending a Class
#### Problem
You want to extend a base class that has constructor parameters, and your new subclass may take additional parameters.

#### Solution
In this section I cover the case of extending a class that has one or more val constructor parameters. The solution for handling constructor parameters that are defined as var is more complicated, and is handled in the Discussion.

WORKING WITH VAL CONSTRUCTOR PARAMETERS
Assuming that your base class has only val constructor parameters, when you define your subclass constructor, leave the val declaration off of the fields that are common to both classes. Then define new constructor parameters in the subclass as val (or var) fields.

To demonstrate this, first define a Person base class that has a val parameter named name:

    class Person(val name: String)
Next define Employee as a subclass of Person, so that it takes the constructor parameter name and a new parameter named age. The name parameter is common to the parent Person class, so leave the val declaration off of that field, but age is new, so declare it as a val:

    class Employee(name: String, val age: Int) extends Person(name):
        override def toString = s"$name is $age years old"
Now you can create a new Employee:

    scala> val joe = Employee("Joe", 33)
    val joe: Employee = Joe is 33 years old
This works as desired, and because the fields are immutable, there are no other issues.

## Calling a Superclass Constructor
#### Problem
You want to control the superclass constructor that’s called when you define constructors in a subclass.

#### Solution
This is a bit of a trick question, because you can control the superclass constructor that’s called by the primary constructor in a subclass, but you can’t control the superclass constructor that’s called by an auxiliary constructor in the subclass.

When you define a subclass in Scala, you control the superclass constructor that’s called by its primary constructor when you specify the extends portion of the subclass declaration. For instance, in the following code, the primary constructor of the Dog class calls the primary constructor of the Pet class, which is a one-arg constructor that takes name as its parameter:

    class Pet(var name: String)
    class Dog(name: String) extends Pet(name)
Furthermore, if the Pet class has multiple constructors, the primary constructor of the Dog class can call any one of those constructors. In this next example, the primary constructor of the Dog class calls the one-arg auxiliary constructor of the Pet class by specifying that constructor in its extends clause:

    // (1) two-arg primary constructor
    class Pet(var name: String, var age: Int):
        // (2) one-arg auxiliary constructor
        def this(name: String) = this(name, 0)
        override def toString = s"$name is $age years old"

    // calls the Pet one-arg constructor
    class Dog(name: String) extends Pet(name)
Alternatively, it can also call the two-arg primary constructor of the Pet class:

    // call the two-arg constructor
    class Dog(name: String) extends Pet(name, 0)
However, in regards to auxiliary constructors, because the first line of an auxiliary constructor must be a call to another constructor of the current class, there’s no way for auxiliary constructors to call a superclass constructor.

## Defining an equals Method (Object Equality)
#### Problem
You want to define an equals method for a class so you can compare object instances to each other.

#### Solution
This solution is easier to understand if I cover a bit of background, so first I’ll share three pieces of background you need to know.

The first thing to know is that object instances are compared with the == symbol:

    "foo" == "foo"   // true
    "foo" == "bar"   // false
    "foo" == null    // false
    null == "foo"    // false
    1 == 1           // true
    1 == 2           // false

    case class Person(name: String)
    Person("Alex") == Person("Alvin")   // false
This is different than Java, which uses == for primitive values and equals for object comparisons.

The second thing to know is that == is defined on the Any class, so (a) it’s inherited by all other classes, and (b) it calls the equals method that’s defined for a class. What happens is that when you write 1 == 2, that code is the same as writing 1.==(2), and then that == method invokes the equals method on the 1 object, which is an instance of Int in this example.

The third thing to know is that properly writing an equals method turns out to be a difficult problem, so much so that Programming in Scala, Third Edition, by Odersky, Venners, and Spoon (Artima Press) takes 23 pages to discuss it, and Effective Java, Third Edition, by Joshua Bloch (Addison-Wesley) takes 17 pages to cover object equality. Effective Java begins its treatment with the statement, “Overriding the equals method seems simple, but there are many ways to get it wrong, and the consequences can be dire.” Despite this complexity, I’ll attempt to demonstrate a solid solution to the problem, and also share references for further reading.

DON’T IMPLEMENT EQUALS UNLESS NECESSARY
Before jumping into the “How to implement an equals method” solution, it’s worth noting that Effective Java states that not implementing an equals method is the correct solution for the following situations:

Each instance of a class is inherently unique. Instances of a Thread class are given as an example.

There is no need for the class to provide a “logical equality” test. The Java Pattern class is given as an example, where the designers didn’t think that people would want or need this functionality, so it simply inherits its behavior from the Java Object class.

A superclass has already overridden equals, and its behavior is appropriate for this class.

The class is private or package-private (in Java), and you are certain its equals method will never be invoked.

Those are four situations where you won’t want to write a custom equals method for a Java class, and those rules make sense for Scala as well. The rest of this recipe focuses on how to properly implement an equals method.

A SEVEN-STEP PROCESS
- Programming in Scala is co-written by Martin Odersky, the creator of the Scala language, and the book recommends a seven-step process for implementing an equals method for non-final classes:

- Create a canEqual method with the proper signature, taking an Any parameter and returning a Boolean.

- canEqual should return true if the argument passed into it is an instance of the current class, false otherwise. (The current class is especially important with inheritance.)

- Implement the equals method with the proper signature, taking an Any parameter and returning a Boolean.

- Write the body of equals as a single match expression.

- The match expression should have two cases. As you’ll see in the following code, the first case should be a typed pattern for the current class.

- In the body of this first case, implement a series of logical “and” tests for all of the tests in this class that must be true. If this class extends anything other than AnyRef, you’ll want to invoke your superclass equals method as part of these tests. One of the “and” tests must also be a call to canEqual.

For the second case, just specify a wildcard pattern that yields false.

Any time you implement an equals method you should also implement a hashCode method.

I’ll show two examples in this recipe, one here, and another in the Discussion.

EXAMPLE 1: IMPLEMENTING EQUALS FOR A SINGLE CLASS
Here’s an example that demonstrates how to properly write an equals method for a small Scala class. In this example I create a Person class with two var fields:

    class Person (var name: String, var age: Int)
Given those two constructor parameters, here’s the complete source code for a Person class that implements an equals method and a corresponding hashCode method. The comments show which steps in the solution the code refers to:

    class Person (var name: String, var age: Int):

        // Step 1 - proper signature for `canEqual`
        // Step 2 - compare `a` to the current class
        // (isInstanceOf returns 'true' or 'false')
        def canEqual(a: Any) = a.isInstanceOf[Person]

        // Step 3 - proper signature for `equals`
        // Steps 4 thru 7 - implement a `match` expression
        override def equals(that: Any): Boolean =
            that match
                case that: Person =>
                    that.canEqual(this) &&
                    this.name == that.name &&
                    this.age == that.age
                case _ =>
                    false

        // Step 8 - implement a corresponding hashCode method
        override def hashCode: Int =
            val prime = 31
            var result = 1
            result = prime * result + age
            result = prime * result + (if name == null then 0 else name.hashCode)
            result

    end Person
If you compare that code to the seven steps previously described, you’ll see that they match those definitions. A key to the solution is this code inside the first case statement:

    case that: Person =>
        that.canEqual(this) &&
        this.name == that.name &&
        this.age == that.age
This code tests to see whether that is an instance of Person:

    case that: Person =>
If that is not a Person, the other case statement is executed.

Next, this line of code tests the opposite situation: that the current instance (this) is an instance of the class of that:

    that.canEqual(this) ...
This is particularly important when inheritance is involved, such as when Employee is an instance of Person, but Person is not an instance of Employee.

After that, the rest of the code after canEqual tests the equality of the individual fields in the Person class.

With the equals method defined, you can compare instances of a Person with ==, as demonstrated in the following ScalaTest unit tests:

    import org.scalatest.funsuite.AnyFunSuite

    class PersonTests extends AnyFunSuite:

        // these first two instances should be equal
        val nimoy   = Person("Leonard Nimoy", 82)
        val nimoy2  = Person("Leonard Nimoy", 82)
        val nimoy83 = Person("Leonard Nimoy", 83)
        val shatner = Person("William Shatner", 82)

        // [1] a basic test to start with
        test("nimoy   != null")    { assert(nimoy != null) }

        // [2]  these reflexive and symmetric tests should all be true
        // [2a] reflexive
        test("nimoy   == nimoy")   { assert(nimoy == nimoy) }
        // [2b] symmetric
        test("nimoy   == nimoy2")  { assert(nimoy == nimoy2) }
        test("nimoy2  == nimoy")   { assert(nimoy2 == nimoy) }

        // [3] these should not be equal
        test("nimoy   != nimoy83") { assert(nimoy != nimoy83) }
        test("nimoy   != shatner") { assert(nimoy != shatner) }
        test("shatner != nimoy")   { assert(shatner != nimoy) }
All of these tests pass as desired. In the Discussion, the “reflexive” and “symmetric” comments are explained, and a second example shows how this formula works when an Employee class extends Person.

IntelliJ IDEA
At the time of this writing, when given a Person class with name and age fields, IntelliJ IDEA generates an equals method that is almost identical to the code shown in this solution.

EXAMPLE 2: INHERITANCE
An important benefit of this approach is that you can continue to use it when you use inheritance in classes. For instance, in the following code, the Employee class extends the Person class that’s shown in the Solution. It uses the same formula that was shown in the first example, with additional tests to (a) test the new role field in Employee, and (b) call super.equals(that) to verify that equals in Person is also true:

    class Employee(name: String, age: Int, var role: String)
    extends Person(name, age):
        override def canEqual(a: Any) = a.isInstanceOf[Employee]

        override def equals(that: Any): Boolean =
            that match
                case that: Employee =>
                    that.canEqual(this) &&
                    this.role == that.role &&
                    super.equals(that)
                case _ =>
                    false

        override def hashCode: Int =
            val prime = 31
            var result = 1
            result = prime * result + (if role == null then 0 else role.hashCode)
            result + super.hashCode

    end Employee
Note in this code:

canEqual checks for an instance of Employee (not Person).

The first case expression also tests for Employee (not Person).

The Employee case calls canEqual, tests the field(s) in its class, and also calls super.equals(that) to use the equals code in Person to use its equality tests. This ensures that the fields in Person as well as the new role field in Employee are all equal.

The following ScalaTest unit tests verify that the equals method in Employee is implemented correctly:

    import org.scalatest.funsuite.AnyFunSuite

    class EmployeeTests extends AnyFunSuite:

        // these first two instance should be equal
        val eNimoy1 = Employee("Leonard Nimoy", 82, "Actor")
        val eNimoy2 = Employee("Leonard Nimoy", 82, "Actor")
        val pNimoy = Person("Leonard Nimoy", 82)
        val eShatner = Employee("William Shatner", 82, "Actor")

        // equality tests (reflexive and symmetric)
        test("eNimoy1 == eNimoy1") { assert(eNimoy1 == eNimoy1) }
        test("eNimoy1 == eNimoy2") { assert(eNimoy1 == eNimoy2) }
        test("eNimoy2 == eNimoy1") { assert(eNimoy2 == eNimoy1) }

        // non-equality tests
        test("eNimoy1  != pNimoy")   { assert(eNimoy1  != pNimoy) }
        test("pNimoy   != eNimoy1")  { assert(pNimoy   != eNimoy1) }
        test("eNimoy1  != eShatner") { assert(eNimoy1  != eShatner) }
        test("eShatner != eNimoy1")  { assert(eShatner != eNimoy1) }
All the tests pass, including the comparison of the eNimoy and pNimoy objects, which are instances of the Employee and Person classes, respectively.

BEWARE EQUALS METHODS WITH VAR FIELDS AND MUTABLE COLLECTIONS
As a warning, while these examples demonstrate a solid formula for implementing equals and hashCode methods, the Artima document, How to Write an Equality Method in Java, explains that when equals and hashCode algorithms depend on mutable state, i.e., var fields like name, age, and role, this can be a problem for users in collections.

The basic problem is that if users of your class put mutable fields into collections, the fields can change after they’re in the collection. Here’s a demonstration of this problem. First, create an Employee instance like this:

    val eNimoy = Employee("Leonard Nimoy", 81, "Actor")
Then add that instance to a Set:

    val set = scala.collection.mutable.Set[Employee]()
    set += eNimoy
When you run this code, you’ll see that it returns true, as expected:

    set.contains(eNimoy)   // true
But now if you modify the eNimoy instance and then run the same test, you’ll find that it (probably) returns false:

    eNimoy.age = 82
    set.contains(eNimoy)   // false
In regards to handling this problem, the Artima blog post suggests that in this situation you shouldn’t override hashCode and should name your equality method something other than equals. This way, your class will inherit the default implementations of hashCode and equals.

IMPLEMENTING HASHCODE
I won’t discuss hashCode algorithms in depth, but in Effective Java, Joshua Bloch writes that the following statements comprise the contract for hashCode algorithms (which he adapted from the Java Object documentation):

When hashCode is invoked on an object repeatedly within an application, it must consistently return the same value, provided that no information in the equals method comparison has changed.

If two objects are equal according to their equals methods, their hashCode values must be the same.

If two objects are unequal according to their equals methods, it is not required that their hashCode values be different. But, producing distinct results for unequal objects may improve the performance of hash tables.

As a brief survey of hashCode algorithms, the algorithm I used in the Person class is consistent with the suggestions in Effective Java:

    // note: the `if (name == null) 0` test is required because
    // `null.hashCode` throws a NullPointerException
    override def hashCode: Int =
        val prime = 31
        var result = 1
        result = prime * result + age
        result = prime * result + (if name == null then 0 else name.hashCode)
        result
Next, this is the hashCode method produced by making Person a case class, then compiling its code with the Scala 3 scalac command, and decompiling it with JAD:

    public int hashCode() {
        int i = 0xcafebabe;
        i = Statics.mix(i, productPrefix().hashCode());
        i = Statics.mix(i, Statics.anyHash(name()));
        i = Statics.mix(i, age());
        return Statics.finalizeHash(i, 2);
    }
The IntelliJ IDEA “generate code” option generates this code for a Scala 2.x version of the Person class:

    // scala 2 syntax
    override def hashCode(): Int = {
        val state = Seq(super.hashCode(), name, age)
        state.map(_.hashCode()).foldLeft(0)((a, b) => 31 * a + b)
    }

## Preventing Accessor and Mutator Methods from Being Generated
#### Problem
When you define a class field as a var, Scala automatically generates accessor (getter) and mutator (setter) methods for it, and defining a field as a val automatically generates an accessor method, but you don’t want either an accessor or a mutator.

#### Solution
The solution is to either:

Add the private access modifier to the val or var declaration so it can only be accessed by instances of the current class

Add the protected access modifier so it can be accessed by classes that extend the current class

THE PRIVATE MODIFIER
As an example of how the private access modifier works, this Animal class declares _numLegs as a private field. As a result, other non-Animal instances can’t access _numLegs, but notice that the iHaveMoreLegs method can access the _numLegs field of another Animal instance (as that._numLegs):

    class Animal:
        private var _numLegs = 2
        def numLegs = _numLegs                // getter
        def numLegs_=(numLegs: Int): Unit =   // setter
            _numLegs = numLegs

        // note that we can access the `_numLegs` field of
        // another Animal instance (`that`)
        def iHaveMoreLegs(that: Animal) =
            this._numLegs > that._numLegs
Given that code, all of the follow ScalaTest assert tests pass:

    val a = Animal()
    assert(a.numLegs == 2)   // getter test

    a.numLegs = 4
    assert(a.numLegs == 4)   // setter test

    // the default number of legs is 2, so this is true
    val b = Animal()
    assert(a.iHaveMoreLegs(b))
Also, if you attempt to access _numLegs from outside the class, you’ll see that this code won’t compile:

    //a._numLegs   // error, cannot be accessed (others cannot access _numLegs)
THE PROTECTED MODIFIER
If you change the _numLegs field in Animal from private to protected, you can then create a new class that extends Animal, while overriding the _numLegs value:

    class Dog extends Animal:
        _numLegs = 4
When you do this and then create two Dog instances, you’ll see that all of these tests pass, just like the previous tests:


    val a = Dog()
    assert(a.numLegs == 4)

    a.numLegs = 3
    assert(a.numLegs == 3)
    // the default number of legs is 4, so this is true
    val b = Dog()
    assert(b.iHaveMoreLegs(a))
Similarly, _numLegs still can’t be accessed from outside the class, so this line of code won’t compile:

    a._numLegs   // compiler error, cannot be accessed
