## Using Function Literals (Anonymous Functions)
#### Problem
You want to use an anonymous function — also known as a function literal — so you can pass it into a method that takes a function, or to assign it to a variable.

#### Solution
Given this List:

    scala> val x = List.range(1, 10)
    val x: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)
you can pass an anonymous function to the list’s filter method to create a new List that contains only even numbers:

    val evens = x.filter((i: Int) => i % 2 == 0)
                         ----------------------
The anonymous function is underlined in that example. The REPL demonstrates that this expression yields a new List of even numbers:

    scala> val evens = x.filter((i: Int) => i % 2 == 0)
    evens: List[Int] = List(2, 4, 6, 8)
In this solution, the following code is a function literal, and when it’s passed into a method like this it’s also known as an anonymous function, what some programming languages also refer to as a lambda:

    (i: Int) => i % 2 == 0
Although that code works, it shows the most explicit form for defining a function literal. Thanks to several Scala shortcuts, the expression can be simplified to this:

    val evens = x.filter(_ % 2 == 0)
The REPL shows that this returns the same result:

    scala> val evens = x.filter(_ % 2 == 0)
    evens: List[Int] = List(2, 4, 6, 8)

## Passing Functions Around as Variables
#### Problem
You want to create a function as a variable and pass it around, just like you pass String, Int, and other variables around in an object-oriented programming language.

#### Solution
Use the syntax shown in Recipe 10.1 to define a function literal, and then assign that literal to a variable. For instance, the following code defines a function literal that takes an Int parameter and returns a value that is twice the amount of the Int that’s passed in:

    (i: Int) => i * 2
As mentioned in Recipe 10.1, you can think of the => symbol as a transformer. In this case, the function transforms the Int value i into an Int value that’s twice the value of i.

Now you can assign that function literal to a variable:

    val double = (i: Int) => i * 2
When you paste that code into the REPL, you’ll see that it recognizes double as a function that transforms an Int into another Int, as shown in this underlined code:

    scala> val double = (i: Int) => i * 2
    val double: Int => Int = Lambda...
                ----------
At this point the variable double is a variable instance, just like an instance of a String, Int, or other type, but in this case, it’s an instance of a function, known as a function value. You can now invoke double just like calling a method:

    double(2)   // 4
    double(3)   // 6
Beyond just invoking double like this, you can also pass it to any method that takes a function parameter that matches its signature. For instance, the map method on a sequence class like List takes a function parameter that transforms a type A into a type B, as shown by its signature:

    def map[B](f: (A) => B): List[B]
               -----------
Because of this, when you’re working with a List[Int], you can give map the double function, which transforms an Int into an Int:

    scala> val list = List.range(1, 5)
    list: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3, 4)

    scala> list.map(double)
    res0: List[Int] = List(2, 4, 6, 8)
In this example the generic type A is an Int and the generic type B also happens to be an Int, but in more complicated examples they can be other types. For instance, you can create a function that transforms a String to an Int:

    val length = (s: String) => s.length
Then you can use that String to Int function with the map method on a list of strings:

    scala> val lengths = List("Mercedes", "Hannah", "Emily").map(length)
    val lengths: List[Int] = List(8, 6, 5)
Welcome to the world of functional programming.

## Defining a Method That Accepts a Simple Function Parameter
#### Problem
You want to create a method that takes a simple function as a method parameter.

#### Solution
This solution follows a three-step process:

Define your method, including the signature for the function you want to take as a method parameter

Define one or more functions that match this signature

Sometime later, pass the function(s) as a parameter to your method

To demonstrate this, define a method named executeFunction, which takes a function as a parameter. The method takes one parameter named callback, which is a function. That function must have no input parameters and must return nothing:

    def executeFunction(callback:() => Unit) =
        callback()
Two notes about this code:

The callback:() syntax specifies a function that has no input parameters. If the function had parameters, the types would be listed inside the parentheses.

The => Unit portion of the code indicates that this callback function returns nothing.

I’ll discuss this syntax more shortly.

Next, define a function or method that matches this signature. For example, both sayHelloF and sayHelloM take no input parameters and return nothing:

    val sayHelloF = () => println("Hello")     // function
    def sayHelloM(): Unit = println("Hello")   // method
Now in the last step of the recipe, because both sayHelloF and sayHelloM match callback’s type signature, they can be passed to the executeFunction method:

    executeFunction(sayHelloF)
    executeFunction(sayHelloM)
The REPL demonstrates how this works:

    scala> val sayHelloF = () => println("Hello")
    val sayHelloF: () => Unit = Lambda...

    scala> def sayHelloM(): Unit = println("Hello")
    def sayHelloM(): Unit

    scala> executeFunction(sayHelloF)
    Hello

    scala> executeFunction(sayHelloM)
    Hello

## Declaring More Complex Higher-Order Functions
#### Problem
You want to define a method that takes a function as a parameter, and that function may have one or more input parameters, and may return a value other than Unit. Your method may also have additional parameters.

#### Solution
Following the approach described in Recipe 10.3, define a method that takes a function as a parameter. Specify the function signature you expect to receive, and then execute that function inside the body of the method.

The following example defines a method named exec that takes a function as an input parameter. That function must take one Int as an input parameter and return nothing:

    def exec(callback: Int => Unit) =
        // invoke the function we were given, giving it an Int parameter
        callback(1)
Next, define a function that matches the expected signature. Both this function and this method match callback’s signature because they take an Int argument and return nothing:

    val plusOne = (i: Int) => println(i+1)
    def plusOne(i: Int) = println(i+1)
Now you can pass either version of plusOne into the exec function:

    exec(plusOne)
Because plusOne is called inside the method, this code prints the number 2.

Any function that matches this signature can be passed into the exec method. For instance, define a new function (or method) named plusTen that also takes an Int and returns nothing:

    val plusTen = (i: Int) => println(i+10)
    def plusTen(i: Int) = println(i+10)
Now you can pass it into your exec function, and see that it also works:

    exec(plusTen)   // prints 11
Although these examples are simple, you can see the power of the technique: you can easily swap in interchangeable algorithms. As long as the signature of the function or method that’s passed in matches what your method expects, your algorithms can do anything you want. This is comparable to swapping out algorithms in the OOP Strategy design pattern.

## Using Partially-Applied Functions
#### Problem
You want to eliminate repetitively passing variables into a function by (a) passing common variables into the function to (b) create a new function that is preloaded with those values, and then (c) use the new function, passing it only the unique variables it needs.

#### Solution
The classic example of a partially-applied function begins with a sum function:

    val sum = (a: Int, b: Int, c: Int) => a + b + c
There’s nothing special about sum, it’s just a function that sums three Int values. But things get interesting when you supply two of the parameters when calling sum, but don’t provide the third parameter:

    val addTo3 = sum(1, 2, _)
Because you haven’t provided a value for the third parameter, the resulting variable addTo3 is a partially-applied function. You can see this in the REPL. First, paste in the sum function:

    scala> val sum = (a: Int, b: Int, c: Int) => a + b + c
    val sum: (Int, Int, Int) => Int = Lambda...
The REPL result shows this output:

    val sum: (Int, Int, Int) => Int = Lambda...
              -------------     ---
This output verifies that sum is a function that takes three Int input parameters and returns an Int. Next, give sum only two of the three input parameters it wants, while assigning the result to addTo3:

    scala> val addTo3 = sum(1, 2, _)
    val addTo3: Int => Int = Lambda...
                ----------
The underlined portion of the REPL result shows that addTo3 is a function that transforms a single Int input parameter into an output Int parameter. addTo3 is created by giving sum the input parameters 1 and 2, and now addTo3 is a function that can take one more input parameter. So now when you give addTo3 an Int, such as the number 10, you magically get the sum of the three numbers that have been passed into the two functions:

    scala> addTo3(10)
    res0: Int = 13
Here’s a summary of what just happened:

The first two numbers (1 and 2) were passed into the original sum function

That process creates the new function named addTo3, which is a partially-applied function

Some time later in the code, the third number (10) is passed into addTo3

Note that in this example I create sum as a val function, but it can also be defined as a def method, and it will work exactly the same:

    scala> def sum(a: Int, b: Int, c: Int) = a + b + c
    def sum(a: Int, b: Int, c: Int): Int

    scala> val addTo3 = sum(1, 2, _)
    val addTo3: Int => Int = Lambda...

    scala> addTo3(10)
    val res0: Int = 13

## Creating a Method That Returns a Function
#### Problem
You want to return a function (algorithm) from a function or method.

#### Solution
Define an anonymous function, and return that from your method. Then assign that to a function variable, and later invoke that function variable as needed.

For example, assuming that a variable named prefix exists in the current scope, this code declares an anonymous function that takes a String argument named str and returns that string with prefix prepended to it:

    (str: String) => s"$prefix $str"
Now you can return that anonymous function from the body of another function as follows:

    // single line syntax
    def saySomething(prefix: String) = (str: String) => s"$prefix $str"

    // multiline syntax, which might be easier to read
    def saySomething(prefix: String) = (str: String) =>
        s"$prefix $str"
That example doesn’t show saySomething’s return type, but you can declare it as (String => String), if you prefer:

    def saySomething(prefix: String): (String => String) = (str: String) =>
        s"$prefix $str"
Because saySomething returns a function that transforms one String to another String, you can assign that resulting function to a variable. saySomething also takes the String parameter named prefix, so give it that parameter as you create a new function named sayHello:

    val sayHello = saySomething("Hello")
When you paste that code into the REPL, you can see that sayHello is a function that transforms a String to a String:

    scala> val sayHello = saySomething("Hello")
    val sayHello: String => String = Lambda...
                  ----------------
sayHello is essentially the same as saySomething, but with prefix pre-loaded to the value "Hello". Looking back at the anonymous function, you see that it takes a String parameter s and returns a String, so you pass it a String:

    sayHello("Al")
Here’s what these steps look like in the REPL:

    scala> def saySomething(prefix: String) = (str: String) =>
         |     s"$prefix $str"
    def saySomething(prefix: String): String => String

    // assign "Hello" to prefix
    scala> val sayHello = saySomething("Hello")
    val sayHello: String => String = Lambda...

    // assign "Al" to str
    scala> sayHello("Al")
    res0: String = Hello Al

## Creating Partial Functions
#### Problem
You want to define a function that only works for a subset of possible input values, or you want to define a series of functions that only work for a subset of input values and then combine those functions to completely solve a problem.

#### Solution
A partial function is a function that does not provide an answer for every possible input value it can be given. It provides an answer only for a subset of possible data, and defines the data it can handle. In Scala, a partial function can also be queried to determine if it can handle a particular value.

For example, imagine a normal function that divides one number by another:

    val divide = (x: Int) => 42 / x
As defined, this function blows up when the input parameter is zero:

    scala> divide(0)
    java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero
Although you could handle this particular situation by catching and throwing an exception, Scala lets you define the divide function as a PartialFunction. When doing so, you also explicitly state that the function is defined when the input parameter is not zero:

    val divide = new PartialFunction[Int, Int] {
        def apply(x: Int) = 42 / x
        def isDefinedAt(x: Int) = x != 0
    }
In this approach, the apply method defines the function signature and body. Now you can do several nice things. One thing you can do is test the function before you attempt to use it:

    scala> divide.isDefinedAt(0)
    res0: Boolean = false

    scala> divide.isDefinedAt(1)
    res1: Boolean = true

    scala> val x = if divide.isDefinedAt(1) then Some(divide(1)) else None
    val x: Option[Int] = Some(42)
In addition to this, you’ll see shortly that other code can take advantage of partial functions to provide elegant and concise solutions.

Whereas that divide function is explicit about what data it handles, partial functions can also be written using case statements:

    val divide2: PartialFunction[Int, Int] =
        case d if d != 0 => 42 / d
With this approach, Scala can infer that divide2 takes an Int input parameter based on this part of the code:

    PartialFunction[Int, Int]
                ---
Although this code doesn’t explicitly implement the isDefinedAt method, it works the same as the previous divide function definition:

    scala> divide2.isDefinedAt(0)
    res0: Boolean = false

    scala> divide2.isDefinedAt(1)
    res1: Boolean = true

## Implementing Functional Error Handling
#### Problem
You’ve started to write code in a functional programming (FP) style, but you’re not sure how to handle exceptions and other errors when writing pure functions.

#### Solution
Because writing functional code is like writing algebraic equations — and because algebraic equations always return a value and never throw an exception — your pure functions don’t throw exceptions. Instead, you handle errors with Scala’s error handling types:

Option/Some/None

Try/Success/Failure

Either/Left/Right

My canonical example for this is writing a makeInt method. Imagine for a moment that Scala doesn’t include a makeInt method on a String, so you want to write your own method. A correct solution looks like this:

    def makeInt(s: String): Option[Int] =
        try
            Some(Integer.parseInt(s))
        catch
            case e: NumberFormatException => None
This code returns a Some[Int] if makeInt can convert the String to an Int, otherwise it returns a None. Callers of this method use it like this:

    makeInt("1")   // Option[Int] = Some(1)
    makeInt("a")   // Option[Int] = None

    makeInt(aString) match
        case Some(i) => println(s"i = $i")
        case None => println("Could not create an Int")
Given a list of strings listOfStrings that may or may not convert to integers, you can also use makeInt like this:

    val optionalListOfInts: Seq[Option[Int]] =
        for s <- listOfStrings yield makeInt(s)
This is great because makeInt doesn’t throw an exception and blow up that for expression. Instead, the for expression returns a Seq that contain Option[Int] values. For instance, if listOfStrings contains these values:

    val listOfStrings = List("a", "1", "b", "2")
then optionalListOfInts will contain these values:

    List(None, Some(1), None, Some(2))
To create a list that contains only the values that were successfully converted to integers, just flatten that list like this:

val ints = optionalListOfInts.flatten   // List(1, 2)
In addition to using the Option types for this solution, you can also use the Try and Either types. Much shorter versions of the makeInt method that use these three error handling types looks like this:

    import scala.util.control.Exception._
    import scala.util.{Try, Success, Failure}

    def makeInt(s: String): Option[Int] = allCatch.opt(Integer.parseInt(s))
    def makeInt(s: String): Try[Int] = Try(Integer.parseInt(s))
    def makeInt(s: String): Either[Throwable, Int] =
        allCatch.either(Integer.parseInt(s))
    These examples show the success and error cases for those three approaches:

    // Option
    makeInt("1")   // Some(1)
    makeInt("a")   // None

    // Try
    makeInt("1")   // util.Try[Int] = Success(1)
    makeInt("a")   // util.Try[Int] = Failure(java.lang.NumberFormatException:
                   //                 For input string: "a")

    // Either
    makeInt("1")   // Either[Throwable, Int] = Right(1)
    makeInt("a")   // Either[Throwable, Int] = Left(java.lang.NumberFormatException:
                   //                          For input string: "a")
The key to all of these approaches is that you don’t throw exceptions; instead, you return these error-handling types.

Using Either gets you ready for FP libraries like ZIO
While reviewing this chapter, Hermann Hueck, one of the reviewers of this book, made the point that two benefits of using Either are that (a) it’s more flexible than Try, because you can control the error type, and (b) using it gets you ready to use FP libraries like ZIO, which use Either and similar approaches extensively.

#### Solution
A bad (non-FP) approach to this problem is to instead write the method like this to throw an exception:

    // don’t write code like this!
    @throws(classOf[NumberFormatException])
    def makeInt(s: String): Int =
        try
            Integer.parseInt(s)
        catch
            case e: NumberFormatException => throw e
You don’t write code like this in FP because when other people use your method, it will blow up their equations when an exception occurs. For instance, imagine that someone writes this for-expression that uses this version of makeInt:

    val possibleListOfInts: Seq[Int] =
        for s <- listOfStrings yield makeInt(s)
If listOfStrings contains the same values that were shown in the Solution:

val listOfStrings = List("a", "1", "b", "2")
their for-expression — which they want to be an algebraic equation — will blow up on the first element, the "a" in the list.

Again, because algebraic equations don’t throw exceptions, pure functions don’t throw them either.
